IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

1

EmT: A Novel Transformer for Generalized
Cross-subject EEG Emotion Recognition

arXiv:2406.18345v3 [cs.LG] 17 Mar 2025

Yi Ding, Member, IEEE, Chengxuan Tong, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Shuailei Zhang, Muyun Jiang,
Yong Li, Kevin Lim Jun Liang, and Cuntai Guan, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Integrating prior knowledge of neurophysiology into
neural network architecture enhances the performance of emotion decoding. While numerous techniques emphasize learning
spatial and short-term temporal patterns, there has been limited
emphasis on capturing the vital long-term contextual information
associated with emotional cognitive processes. In order to address
this discrepancy, we introduce a novel transformer model called
emotion transformer (EmT). EmT is designed to excel in both
generalized cross-subject EEG emotion classification and regression tasks. In EmT, EEG signals are transformed into a temporal
graph format, creating a sequence of EEG feature graphs using
a temporal graph construction module (TGC). A novel residual
multi-view pyramid GCN module (RMPG) is then proposed to
learn dynamic graph representations for each EEG feature graph
within the series, and the learned representations of each graph
are fused into one token. Furthermore, we design a temporal
contextual transformer module (TCT) with two types of token
mixers to learn the temporal contextual information. Finally, the
task-specific output module (TSO) generates the desired outputs.
Experiments on four publicly available datasets show that EmT
achieves higher results than the baseline methods for both EEG
emotion classification and regression tasks. The code is available
at https://github.com/yi-ding-cs/EmT.
Index Terms—Deep learning, electroencephalography, graph
neural networks, transformer.

I. I NTRODUCTION

E

MOTION recognition using electroencephalography
(EEG) plays an important role in brain-computer interface (BCI) assisted mental disorder regulation. It requires machine to perceive human emotional states from brain activities
using artificial intelligence techniques [1], [2]. The predictions
of emotions can be used for neurofeedback in the regulation
process [3]. Accurate predictions and fair generalization abilities to unseen subjects are crucial in building robust real-world
BCI systems. Deep learning methods have shown promising
results for accurate detection of brain activities [4], [5]. The
design of the neural network architecture becomes crucial.
Yi Ding and Chengxuan Tong contribute equally to this work.
Yi Ding, Chengxuan Tong, Shuailei Zhang, Muyun Jiang, and Cuntai Guan
are with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798. E-mail: (ding.yi,
tong0110, shuailei.zhang, james.jiang, ctguan)@ntu.edu.sg.
Chengxuan Tong and Jun Liang Kevin Lim are with Wilmar International,
Singapore. E-mail: (chengxuan.tong, kevin.limjunliang)@sg.wilmar-intl.com.
Yong Li is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering and the
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.
Email: mysee1989@gmail.com
Cuntai Guan is the Corresponding Author.

Incorporating neurophysiological prior knowledge into neural network architectures improves emotion decoding performance [6], [7], [8]. Common considerations include leftright hemisphere asymmetries, neurophysiologically meaningful graph connections, and the temporal dynamics of EEG
signals. According to neuropsychological studies, the left and
right hemispheres react differently to emotions, particularly in
the frontal areas [9]. Several deep learning methods [8], [10],
[11] draw inspiration from this prior knowledge, achieving
improved emotion decoding performance. EEG electrodes are
placed on the scalp, which naturally forms a non-Euclidean
structure. Therefore, many studies treat EEG signals as graphs,
using either a neurophysiologically designed adjacency matrix
[7] or a learnable one [12], [13]. However, there is still more
prior knowledge that should be investigated. As one of the
high-order cognitive processes in the brain, emotion consists
of more basic processes such as attentional, perceptual, and
mnemonic system processes [14]. Different brain regions are
cooperatively activated under different cognitive processes,
e.g., frontal and parietal networks in attention [15] and medial
temporal lobes, prefrontal cortex, and parietal cortex interactions for episodic memory [16]. Using a pre-defined or a single
learnable adjacency matrix cannot capture complex brain
region connectives underlying emotional processes. Another
prior knowledge about emotions is that emotional states are
continuous in short periods while not consistent along the long
stimuli [17]. Less attention is paid to this temporal contextual
information underlying emotions.
To address the above-mentioned problems, we propose a
novel transformer-based structure, named emotion transformer
(EmT), for both generalized cross-subject emotion classification and regression tasks. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work to explore transformer-based structures
on cross-subject EEG emotion classification and regression
tasks together. To learn temporal contextual information, we
represent EEG segments as temporal graphs, as shown in
Figure 2. We learn the spatial information of each EEG
graph to form a token. Then the long-short time contextual
information is learned upon the token sequence.
We propose a residual multi-view pyramid graph convolutional neural networks (GCN) module, named RMPG, to
capture multiple EEG channel connections for different basic
cognitive processes in emotions. Multiple GCNs with independent learnable adjacency matrices are utilized parallelly
in RMPG. Different from [18] that uses multiple adjacency
matrices among manually defined local groups, we learn
the connections among all the EEG channels. The reasons

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

are two-fold: 1) locally defined groups are special cases of
a global connection in which the EEG channels are fully
connected within each local group, and 2) more specific
channel-wise connections can be learned. Those parallel GCNs
have different numbers of layers that can learn multi-view and
multi-level graph embeddings with the help of their learnable
adjacency matrices. Together with the output of a residual
linear projection branch, a feature pyramid is formed. A mean
fusion is utilized to combine the information in the feature
pyramid as one token. Hence, a temporal sequence of tokens
is formed.
We further propose temporal contextual transformers (TCT)
with different token mixers [19] to learn contextual information from the token sequence for EEG emotion classification
and regression tasks. An EEG trial refers to the period when
one type of stimuli, e.g., a happy movie clip, is presented to the
subject while the EEG is recorded. The label of the entire trial
is assigned as happy according to either the self-assessments
or the stimulus contents in classification tasks. However, the
emotional states of the subjects change along with the stimuli
[17]. Cutting each trial into short segments and assigning the
same label to them will induce noisy labels [7]. To relieve
noisy label issues and learn temporal contextual information
of emotions, we can use a longer sliding window with shortshifting steps to split each trial, and the longer segments are
further cut into sub-segments. Multi-head self-attention (MSA)
in transformers [20] can attentively emphasis the parts that
are highly correlated to the overall emotional state of the
longer EEG segment. Because emotion is continuous [21],
the underlying state is consistent in a short period. Hence,
we propose a short-time aggregation (STA) layer after MSA
to learn the long-short-time contextual information. Different
from classification tasks, the label is temporally continuous in
regression tasks. The model needs to regress the continuous
changes of the emotional states for all the segments within
a sequence. Although MSA can globally emphasis important
parts in the sequence, recurrent neural networks (RNN) can
further fuse the information of all the segments recurrently.
This causal information fusion ability makes RNN more
suitable for regression task. Hence, we propose to use an RNNbased token mixer in TCT for the regression tasks instead of
MSA. To this end, we propose TCT-Clas and TCT-Regr as
the token mixers in EmT for EEG emotion classification and
regression tasks.
The major contribution of this work can be summarised as:
• We propose a novel Emotion Transformer (EmT) for
generalized cross-subject EEG emotion classification and
regression tasks.
• We introduce a residual multi-view pyramid GCN
(RMPG) module, designed to learn multi-view and multilevel graph embeddings using multiple learnable adjacency matrices. This approach incorporates neuroscience
knowledge, recognizing that emotions are composed of
various basic cognitive processes.
• Two types of temporal contextual transformer (TCT)
blocks with task-specific token mixers are proposed to
capture temporal contextual information from EEG data,
accounting for the differing learning objectives between

2

•

classification and regression tasks.
Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate and analyze the proposed EmT on four public datasets. Shanghai
Jiao Tong University emotion EEG dataset (SEED) [22],
the TsingHua University emotional profile dataset (THUEP) [23] and the finer-grained affective computing EEG
dataset (FACED) [24] are used for classification tasks
while the multimodal database for affect recognition and
implicit tagging dataset (MAHNOB-HCI) [25] is utilized
for regression tasks. The results demonstrate the superior
of EmT over the compared baseline methods.
II. R ELATED W ORK

A. Graph Neural Networks
Graph neural networks (GNN) are used for non-Euclidean
graph-structure data. Spectral GNN is a category of GNN
that often rely on expensive eigendecomposition of the graph
laplacian, thus several methods use approximation approaches
to perform spectral filtering. ChebyNet [26] uses Chebyshev
polynomials to approximate the spectral filters. Cayley polynomials are utilized to compute spectral filters for targeted frequency bands, which are localized in space and scale linearly
with input data for sparse graphs [27]. The graph convolutional
network (GCN) approximates spectral filtering with localized
first-order aggregation [28]. EEG signals naturally have a
graph structure. While some methods use GNN/GCN to extract
spatial information from EEG signals, several approaches [7],
[12], [13] do not consider the interactions among multiple
brain areas involved in high-level cognitive processes, relying instead on a single adjacency matrix. Additionally, most
of these methods [7], [12], [13], [18] neglect the temporal
contextual information associated with emotional processes,
using averaged features as node attributes. To effectively
extract spatial relationships among EEG channels, we employ
ChebyNet as the GCN layer in our model. Moreover, instead
of solely using averaged features, we construct EEG signals
as a sequence of spatial graphs to explicitly learn the temporal
contextual information.
B. Temporal Context Learning
Emotion is a continuous cognitive process underlying which
the temporal contextual information is embedded in the EEG
signals. Methods that can learn the temporal dynamics of the
sequence are often used as a temporal context extraction module. [25] utilize a long short-term memory network (LSTM)
to predict the temporally continuous emotion scores. Using
a temporal convolutional network (TCN) shows improved
emotion regression results in [29]. However, both of them learn
from flattened EEG feature vectors, which cannot effectively
learn the spatial relations. TESANet [30] uses 1-D CNN to
extract spatial information in spectral filtered EEG after which
LSTM and self-attention are utilized to extract temporal dynamics to predict the odor pleasantness from the EEG signal.
Conformer [31] combines CNN and transformer, achieving
promising classification results for both emotion and motor
imagery tasks. AMDET [32] utilizes a transformer and attention mechanism on the spectral-spatial-temporal dimensions of

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

MLP

3

MLP

Regression

Mean

TSO

Classification

TCT block
TCT block
Tokens: 𝑠 "
RMPG

𝑠

&

𝑠

… 𝑠 ()* 𝑠 ()' 𝑠 ()&

'

RMPG

+

LP #
𝐴"

LP "

LP %

Φ!" (#)

Φ!$ (#)

Share
LP #

𝐴$

𝑮𝑻 = 𝓖𝒊 :

+

𝐴"

LP "

LP %

Φ!" (#)

Φ!$ (#)
𝐴$

…

f

TGC

:

…

𝑿∈ℝ

Ch 0
Ch 1

…

+×-

Ch (c-1)
Ch (c-2)

Time

+

+

Channel
MLP

Channel
MLP

Norm

Norm

+

+

STA

RNNs

MSA

LP

Norm

Norm

Input
Emb

Input
Emb

TCT-Clas

TCT-Regr

MLP: Multilayer perceptron LP: Linear projection
Φ!" : Base graph encoder Norm: Layer normalization
MSA: Multi-head self-attention STA: Short-time aggregation
Emb: Embedding RNNs: Recurrent Neural Networks
+ : Element-wise addition

Fig. 1. The network structure of EmT. The temporal graphs from TGC are used as the input to RMPG that will transfer each graph into one token embedding.
Then TCT extract the temporal contextual information via specially designed token mixers. We propose two types of TCT structures, named TCT-Clas
and TCT-Regr, for classification and regression tasks separately. A mean fusion is applied before feeding the learned embeddings into MLP head for the
classification output. For regression tasks, a MLP head projects each embedding in the sequence into a scalar to generate a sequence that can be used to
regress the temporally continuous labels.

Graph construction
𝑮𝑻 = {𝓖𝒊 }

f

…
Time
Feature extraction

…

𝑭 ∈ ℝ!×$
$ ∈ ℝ!×#!
𝑿

…

Ch (c-2)
Ch (c-1)

Sliding window

…

Ch 0
Ch 1

knowledge that emotion is short-term stable and long-term
varying.

_
𝑿 ∈ ℝ!×#

Fig. 2. Illustration of TGC. Each segment, X̄, is split into several subsegment, X̃. Features in different frequency bands are extracted for each X̃
channel by channel to form F . Then each EEG channel is regarded as a
node, and the extracted features are treated as node attributes. Combing all
the graphs which are in time order, we get the temporal graphs, GT .

EEG data for EEG emotion recognition. Different from them,
our model effectively learns from spatial topology information
via parallel GCNs with learnable adjacency matrices. We also
propose a short-time aggregation layer inspired by the prior

C. EEG Emotion Recognition
Emotion recognition using EEG data presents a formidable
challenge, primarily due to the inherent variability across
subjects and the subjectivity involved in perceiving emotions.
The efficacy of prediction hinges on the development of a
model capable of discerning crucial features that can distinguish between emotional classes. These extracted features
typically encompass spectral, spatial, and temporal characteristics. Spectral features are typically derived through Fourierbased techniques, involving data filtering, and subsequent
calculation of parameters like power spectral density (PSD) or
differential entropy (DE). Alternatively, spectral filtering can
be achieved by convolutions along the temporal dimension.
Spatial features, on the other hand, are obtained through
spatial convolution, often using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and graph convolutional neural networks (GNNs).
[12] propose DGCNN, a GCN-based network with a learnable adjacency matrix, to learn dynamical spatial patterns
from differential entropy (DE) features. Based on DGCNN, a
broad learning system (BLS) is added in graph convolutional
broad network (GCB-Net) [13], which improves the emotion

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

classification results. [7] proposed a regularized graph neural
network (RGNN) with a neuroscience-inspired learnable adjacency matrix that is constrained to be symmetric and sparse
to perform graph convolution. [18] proposed the instanceadaptive graph method to create graphic connections that are
adapted to the given input. TSception [8] utilizes multi-scaled
temporal and spatial kernels to extract multiple frequency and
spatial asymmetry patterns from EEG. Although they can learn
the spatial and short-time temporal patterns, less attention is
paid to the long-short-time contextual information underlying
emotional cognitive processes.

4

B. Residual Multi-view Pyramid GCN
An RMPG is proposed to modulate the dynamical spatial relations among EEG channels underlying emotional processes.
For each G i in GT , RMPG learns one flattened embedding as
one temporal token si for the subsequent transformer model.
A base graph encoder, Φg (·), is utilized to learn graph
representations. Φg (·) can be ChebyNet [26], GCN [28], GAT
[33] etc.. In this paper, we use ChebyNet as our base graph
encoder:
K−1
X
Φg (F m , A) = σ(
θkm Tk (L̂)F m−1 − bm ),
(1)
k=0

III. M ETHOD
In this work, we propose a novel transformer, EmT, for
both the generalized cross-subject EEG emotion classification
and regression tasks. The network architecture is shown in
Figure 1. EmT consists of four main parts: (1) temporal graph
construction module (TGC), (2) RMPG, (3) TCT, and (4)
task-specific output module (TSO). In TGC, EEG signals are
transformed into temporal graph format that is a sequence
of EEG feature graphs, as shown in Figure 2. RMPG learns
dynamical graph representations for each EEG feature graph
within the series and the learned representations of each graph
are fused into one token. TCT learns the temporal contextual
information via specially designed token mixers. Finally, the
TSO module will generate the desired output for classification
and regression tasks accordingly.
A. EEG-temporal-graph Representations
Temporal graphs are constructed to allow the neural network
to learn spatial and temporal contextual information. Two steps
are required to generate the temporal graphs from EEG, which
are EEG segment/sub-segment segmentation and feature extraction, respectively. Figure 2 shows the construction process
for one EEG segment.
Firstly, EEG signals are split into short segments that are
further split into several shorter sub-segments using sliding
windows. Given one trial of c-channel EEG signals, denoted
by X ∈ Rc×L , it is split into short segment X̄ ∈ Rc×l using
a sliding window of length l, with a hop step being s. Then
another sliding window whose length and hop step are l′ and
s′ is utilized to split each X̄ into a series of sub-segment
′
X̃ ∈ Rc×l , where L > l > l′ . In this paper, l = 20sec =
20 ∗ fs , s = 4sec = 4 ∗ fs for all three datasets, where fs
is the sampling rate of EEG signals. For SEED and THU-EP,
l′ = 2sec = 2 ∗ fs and s′ = 0.5sec = 0.5 ∗ fs . For FACED,
l′ = 4sec = 4 ∗ fs and s′ = 1sec = 1 ∗ fs .
Relative power spectral density (rPSD) features are calculated for each sub-segment X̃ to extract frequency information
of short-period EEG signals. Specifically, the rPSD in delta (14 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), low beta (12-16 Hz),
beta (16-20 Hz), high beta (20-28 Hz), and gamma (30-45 Hz)
seven bands are calculated using welch’s method for each EEG
channel to get a feature matrix F ∈ Rc×f , where f = 7, for
each X̃. Each channel is regarded as one node and the rPSDs
are regarded as node attributes. Hence, we have a temporal
graph representation GT = {G i } ∈ Rseq×c×f for one X̄.

where m = [1, 2, ...] is the number of GCN layers, A ∈ Rc×c
is the adjacency matrix, σ is the ReLU activation function,
θ is the learnable parameter, Tk is the k-order Chebyshev
polynomials that are defined as T0 (x) = 1, T1 (x) = x,
Ti (x) = 2Ti−1 (x) − Ti−2 (x), L̂ = 2L/λmax − I with
1
1
L = I − D − 2 AD − 2 is the re-scaling operation of L, and b
is the bias. We approximate λmax ≈ 2 as [28] to remove its
1
1
high computational cost. Hence, we have L̂ = −D − 2 AD − 2 .
To modulate different brain region connections for
multiple basic cognitive processes underlying emotions
[14], we propose to use multiple different-layer GCNs,
{Φ0g (·), Φ1g (·), ..., Φig (·)} with learnable adjacency matrices
[12], {A0 , A1 , ..., Ai }. These adjacency matrices are randomly initialized with different values and can be dynamically
adjusted using gradient backpropagation [12]. Each Ai can
learn one view of graph connections that belongs to a certain
basic cognitive process. For each Φig (·), stacking different
layers of GCNs can learn different degrees of node cluster
similarity [34]. Intuitively, for localized connections, such as
electrodes within a brain functional area, a deeper GCN can
get a consistent representation among these nodes. However,
for global connections that are among different brain functional areas, a shallow GCN can aggregate the information
among these areas while not over smooth it. The deeper the
Φig (·) is, the taller the feature pyramid level its output has. A
linear projection layer, LP(·), is added for each Φig (·) to project
the flattened graph representations into a hidden embedding
denoted by Hgi ∈ Rdg . By stacking Hgi from parallel differentlayer GCNs, we can get multi-view pyramid graph embeddings
as:
{Hgi } = {LPi (Γ(Φig (F , Ai )))},
(2)
where {·} is the stack operation and Γ(·) is the flatten
operation.
A linear residual branch is added to additionally provide
some information about the non-filtered graphs. The output
serves as the base of the feature pyramid. The linear layer
project the flattened G i into a vector, Hg−base , that has the
same size as Hgi . A mean fusion is applied to combine
different level graph information in the feature pyramid to
form one token:
s = mean({Hg−base , Hg0 , ..., Hgi }),

(3)

where s ∈ Rdg is the token embedding for each G of GT , and
Hg−base = LP(Γ(G)). To this end, GT becomes a temporal
token sequence denoted by ST = {si } ∈ Rseq×dg .

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

5

C. Temporal Contextual Transformer
Two types of TCTs with different token mixers for classification and regression tasks are proposed to capture temporal contextual information of EEG underlying emotional
processes. MetaFormer [19] shows that MSA can be replaced
by different token mixers in transformers. We propose two
types of token mixers with which we have EmT-Clas and
EmT-Regr for EEG emotion classification and regression separately. EmT refers to EmT-Clas unless otherwise stated. Given
ST = {si } ∈ Rseq×dg from RMPG, one block of TCT can
be represented as:
Z m = TokenMixerclas/regr (Norm(Z m−1 )) + Z m−1 ,

(4)

Z m+1 = MLP(Norm(Z m )) + Z m ,

(5)

where m = [1, 2, ...] is the number of layers in TCT blocks,
Z 0 = ST , and MLP has two linear layers with the ReLU
activation in between. A dropout layer is added after each
linear layer.
1) Token Mixers for Classification Tasks: For classification
tasks, MSA is utilized in TokenMixerclas (·) to attentively
emphasis the parts that are highly correlated to the overall
emotional state of ST . The tokens in ST are then linearly
projected into multiple groups of key (K i ), query (Qi ), and
i
value (V i ) using multiple LP(·), parameterized by Wqkv
∈
dg ×3dhead
:
R
i
{Qi , K i , V i } = LPi (ST ) = ST Wqkv
.

(6)

The scaled dot-product is utilized as the attention operation
along temporal tokens to capture long-time context:
√
(7)
Attn(Q, K, V ) = Softmax(QK T / d)V ,
where d = dhead is a scaling factor. Because we need to
apply the proposed STA on separate outputs from heads, we
just stack the head outputs in the formula below:
MSA(ST ) = {Attn(LP0 (ST ), ..., Attn(LPnhead −1 (ST )}.
(8)
Considering the fact that emotion is short-term continuous and
long-term varying [17], we propose a short-time aggregation
(STA) layer after MSA to learn the long-short-time contextual
information. A dropout layer with a scaling factor α, dp(α) is
applied to control the forgetting rate of the temporal context. α
is a hyper-parameter that will scale down the overall dropout
rate in STA. To capture short-term consist patterns and smooth
the effects of the changes in emotional states, CNN kernels
denoted by Kcnn whose size and step are (nanchor , 1), (1, 1)
are utilized to aggregate nanchor temporal neighbors after
MSA. Let Hattn ∈ Rnhead ×seq×dhead denotes one output of
MSA. STA can be described as:
STA(Hattn ) = Reshape(Conv2D(dp(Hattn ), Kcnn ))Wsta ,
(9)
where Conv2D(·) is the 2D convolution operation with the
input being dp(Hattn ) and the kernel being Kcnn , Reshape(·)
is the reshape operation (nhead , seq, dhead ) → (seq, nhead ∗
dhead ), and Wsta ∈ Rnhead ∗dhead ×dg is the projection weight
matrix. The input and output channels of the Conv2D(·)

TABLE I
D ETAILS OF E M T VARIANTS .
Model GCN layers⋆

dg

EmT-S
EmT-B
EmT-D

32
32
32

1, 2
1, 2
1, 2

TCT layers nhead
2
4
8

16
16
16

dhead

K†

32
32
32

3/4
3/4
3/4

⋆: the layers of two parallel GCNs; †: K = 3 for less-channel EEG (e.g.
32 in THU-EP and MAHNOB-HCI) and K = 4 for more-channel EEG
(e.g. 62 in SEED).

all equal nhead . The same padding is utilized to avoid size
changes before and after STA. Hence, TokenMixerclas can be
described as:
TokenMixerclas (ST ) = STA(MSA(ST )).

(10)

2) Token Mixers for Regression Tasks: An RNN-based
token mixer is utilized instead of MSA for TokenMixerregr (·).
MSA emphasises the parts that are highly correlated to the
overall emotional state within a sequence via SA. This is
helpful for the classification task that requires a single output
of the sequence. However, the regression task needs the model
to predict the continuous changes in the emotional states for all
the segments within the sequence. Because RNN-based token
mixer can fuse the information of all the segments recurrently,
it is more suitable for the regression task. The tokens in
ST ∈ Rseq×dg are projected into values (V ) using a projecting
weight matrix, Wv ∈ Rdg ×dhead . Because the RNN-based
token mixer can be RNN, LSTM, GRU, etc., we use RNNs to
denote the RNN family. A two-layer bi-directional GRU whose
output length is 2 ∗ dhead is empirically selected as the token
mixer for EmT-Regr in this paper. Hence, TokenMixerregr can
be described by:
TokenMixerregr (ST ) = RNNs(LP(ST )),

(11)

where LP(ST ) = ST Wv is a linear layer.
D. Task-specific Output Module
MLP heads are utilized to generate the desired output for
classification and regression tasks. Let Sclas ∈ Rseq×dhead
and Sregr ∈ Rseq×2∗dhead denote the learned embedding sequences for classification and regression tasks. The difference
is that a mean fusion is applied to Sclas to combine the
information of all the segments. Hence, the final classification
output, Ŷclas ∈ Rnclass is calculated by:
Ŷclas = mean(Sclas )Wclas + bclas

(12)

where Wclas ∈ Rdhead ×nclass , and bclas ∈ Rnclass are the
weights and bias, respectively. And the final regression output,
Ŷregr ∈ Rseq is calculated by:
Ŷregr = Sregr Wregr + bregr

(13)

where Wregr ∈ R2∗dhead ×1 , and bregr ∈ R1 are the weights
and bias, respectively.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

6

TABLE II
G ENERALIZED EMOTION CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE SEED, THU-EP AND FACED DATASETS . T HE BEST RESULTS ARE
HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD AND THE NEXT BEST ARE MARKED USING UNDERLINES .
SEED

Method

THU-EP

FACED

ACC

std

F1

std

ACC

std

F1

std

ACC

std

F1

std

DGCNN
GCB-Net
RGNN
TSception
TCN
LSTM
TESANet
Conformer
AMDET

0.724
0.684
0.790
0.662
0.765
0.733
0.658
0.612
0.721

0.145
0.172
0.148
0.181
0.140
0.158
0.115
0.127
0.168

0.619
0.517
0.802
0.621
0.737
0.670
0.606
0.529
0.649

0.311
0.357
0.133
0.283
0.219
0.274
0.240
0.221
0.306

0.567
0.554
0.572
0.591
0.577
0.558
0.578
0.601
0.586

0.033
0.043
0.030
0.059
0.031
0.035
0.037
0.038
0.044

0.647
0.620
0.695
0.707
0.677
0.626
0.673
0.691
0.677

0.052
0.088
0.054
0.060
0.031
0.062
0.072
0.042
0.098

0.562
0.565
0.587
0.619
0.552
0.568
0.593
0.590
0.591

0.045
0.052
0.050
0.088
0.035
0.063
0.054
0.035
0.043

0.697
0.685
0.722
0.702
0.673
0.700
0.723
0.720
0.726

0.043
0.053
0.721
0.237
0.035
0.064
0.056
0.035
0.043

EmT-S (ours)
EmT-B (ours)
EmT-D (ours)

0.780
0.788
0.802

0.117
0.117
0.115

0.759
0.793
0.821

0.159
0.120
0.093

0.570
0.595
0.583

0.032
0.047
0.049

0.662
0.724
0.671

0.050
0.044
0.102

0.589
0.608
0.579

0.029
0.065
0.068

0.723
0.740
0.709

0.030
0.058
0.062

IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Datasets
For the classification task, we evaluate the performance of
EmT with three emotion EEG datasets, which are SEED [22],
THU-EP [23] and FACED [24]. For the regression task, we
use a subset of the MAHNOB-HCI dataset [25].
The SEED dataset encompasses data from 15 native Chinese
subjects, with the objective of eliciting negative, positive, and
neutral emotions using 15 Chinese film clips. Each film clip
has a duration of approximately 4 minutes. Subsequently,
the participants are tasked with providing self-evaluations
regarding their emotional responses, considering dimensions
such as valence and arousal after viewing these film clips.
To record brain activity, EEG signals are acquired using a 62channel electrode setup arranged in the 10-20 system, at a high
sampling rate of 1000 Hz. The data undergo preprocessing,
which includes applying a bandpass filter with a frequency
range of 0.3 to 50 Hz.
The THU-EP dataset comprises data from 80 subjects,
involving the use of 28 video clips as stimuli to elicit negative,
positive, and neutral emotions. Each video clip has an average
duration of approximately 67 seconds. These video clips are
associated with a range of emotion items, including anger,
disgust, fear, sadness, amusement, joy, inspiration, tenderness,
arousal, valence, familiarity, and liking. After viewing each
video clip, subjects provided self-report emotional scores
for these emotion items. The EEG data was recorded using
a 32-channel EEG system at a sampling rate of 250 Hz.
The collected data underwent preprocessing, which included
applying a bandpass filter with a frequency range of 0.05 to
47 Hz. Additionally, independent component analysis (ICA)
was employed to effectively remove artifacts from the EEG
data.
The FACED dataset is an extended version of the THU-EP
dataset, comprising data from 123 subjects. The experimental
protocol remains the same as THU-EP, with the addition of
43 subjects, making it a relatively larger dataset for studying
emotions using EEG. The official pre-processed data is used
in this study, with pre-processing steps identical to those in
THU-EP.

MAHNOB-HCI is a comprehensive multi-modal dataset
designed for the investigation of human emotional responses
and the implicit tagging of emotions. This dataset involves
the participation of 30 subjects in data collection experiments.
In these experiments, each subject views 20 film clips while
a variety of data streams are recorded in synchronization.
For the specific task of emotion recognition, a subset of the
MAHNOB-HCI database, as referenced in [1], is employed.
This subset encompasses 24 participants and 239 trials, with
continuous valence labels provided by multiple experts. The
final labels used for analysis are derived by averaging the
annotations from these experts. The EEG signals in the dataset
are collected using 32 electrodes, and they are sampled at a
rate of 256 Hz. Notably, the annotations in the dataset are
characterized by a resolution of 4 Hz.
B. Baselines
We demonstrate the performance of EmT by comparing the
following baseline methods:
1) DGCNN (graph-based): DGCNN [12] dynamically
learns the relationships between different EEG channels
through neural network training, represented by a learnable adjacency matrix. This dynamic learning enhances the extraction
of more discriminative EEG features, ultimately improving
EEG emotion recognition.
2) GCB-Net (graph-based): Based on DGCNN, graph convolutional broad network (GCN-Net) [13] integrates a broad
learning system (BLS) to the nerual network. GCB-Net employs a graph convolutional layer to extract features from
graph-structured input and then stacking multiple conventional
convolutional layers to derive relatively abstract features.
Subsequently, the final concatenation phase adopts a broad
concept, preserving the outputs from all hierarchical layers,
which facilitates the model in exploring features across a wide
spectrum.
3) RGNN (graph-based): RGNN [8] utilizes the biological
topology of different brain regions to capture both local and
global relationships among EEG channels. It models the interchannel relations in EEG signals through an adjacency matrix
within a graph neural network, where the connections and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

sparsity of the adjacency matrix are inspired by neuroscience
theories regarding human brain organization.
4) TSception (CNN-based): TSception [8] is a multi-scale
convolutional neural network designed for generalized emotion
recognition from EEG data. TSception incorporates dynamic
temporal, asymmetric spatial, and high-level fusion layers,
working together to extract discriminative temporal dynamics and spatial asymmetry from both the time and channel
dimensions.
5) LSTM (temporal-learning): LSTM based neural networks [25] are utilized to predict the continuously annotated
emotional labels. LSTM is capable to learn the long-term
temporal dependencies among the EEG segments.
6) TCN (temporal-learning): Zhang et al., use TCN [29]
to learn the temporal information for the continuous EEG
emotion regression tasks. The results indicate TCN has better
regression performances than LSTM.
7) TESANet (temporal-learning): TESANet [30] has been
developed to discern the relations between time segments
within EEG data, enabling the prediction of pleasant and unpleasant emotional states. This network architecture comprises
a filter-bank layer, a spatial convolution layer, a temporal
segmentation layer responsible for partitioning the data into
overlapping time windows, a LSTM layer for encoding these
temporal segments, and a self-attention layer.
8) Conformer (temporal-learning): The Conformer [31]
combines a CNN encoder and a transformer to capture both
the short- and long-term temporal dynamics encoded in EEG
signals, achieving promising results for emotion and motor
imagery classification tasks.
9) AMDET (temporal-learning): AMDET [32] learns from
3D temporal-spectral-spatial representations of EEG signals. It
utilizes a spectral-spatial transformer encoder layer to extract
meaningful features from the EEG signals and employs a
temporal attention layer to highlight crucial time frames,
considering the complementary nature of the spectral, spatial,
and temporal features of the EEG data.

C. Experiment Settings
We conduct generalized subject-independent settings in this
study where test data information is never used during the
training stage. For SEED, we use a leave-one-subject-out
(LOSO) setting. For each step in LOSO, one subject’s data
is selected as test data. 80% of the training data is used as
training data, and the rest 20% is used as validation data. For
the THU-EP and FACED datasets, we adopt a leave-n-subjectout setting [35], where nTHU-EP = 8, and nFACED = 12. The
last three subjects are added in the 10-th fold in FACED. 10%
of the training data is used as the validation data. We perform
binary classification on the positive and negative emotions on
SEED, THU-EP, and FACED as [36]. We process the valence
score of THU-EP and FACED into a binary class of high
and low valence using a threshold of 3.0. For the regression
task, we follow the same data pre-processing and experiment
settings used in [29]. A LOSO is conducted for the regression
task which is identical to the one for SEED.

7

D. Model Variants
We propose three types of EmT variants, namely EmTshallow (EmT-S), EmT-base (EmT-B), and EmT-deep (EmTD). The configurations are shown in Table I. As the names
show, the differences among these variants are the depth of
the TCT blocks. For the K of Chebyshev polynomials is
decided by the number of EEG channels (nodes in graphs).
This is because K decides how many hops from the central
vertex the GCN can aggregate. If the number of EEG channels
is relatively less, e.g., 32 in THU-EP and MAHNOB-HCI,
K = 3. K will be a larger value, K = 4 when the EEG
signals have more channels such as 62 in SEED. EmT-S is
used as the EmT-Regr because it gives the best results on the
validation (development) set.
E. Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation metrics for emotion classification are the
same as those in [8]: Accuracy (ACC) and F1 scores. They
can be calculated by
Accuracy =

F1 = 2 ×

TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN

(14)

Precision × Recall
TP
=
1
Precision + Recall
TP + 2 (FP + FN)

(15)

where TP denotes true positives, TN denotes true negatives,
FP denotes false positives, and FN denotes false negatives.
The evaluation metrics for emotion regression are the same
as those in [29]: root mean square error (RMSE), Pearson’s
correlation coefficient (PCC), and concordance correlation
coefficient (CCC). Given the prediction ŷ, and the continuous
label y, RMSE, PCC, and CCC can be calculated by
s
Pi=0
2
2
ŷ − y
N −1 (ŷi − yi )
RMSE =
=
,
(16)
N
N
Pi=0
σŷy
N −1 (ŷi − µŷ )(yi − µy )
qP
PCC =
= qP
,
i=0
i=0
σŷ σy
(ŷ − µ )2
(y − µ )2
N −1

i

ŷ

N −1

i

y

(17)
CCC =

2σŷy
,
σŷ2 + σy2 + (µŷ − µy )

(18)

where N denotes the number of elements in the prediction/label vector, σŷy denotes the covariance, σŷ and σy are
the variances, and µŷ and µy are the means.
F. Implementation Details
The model configurations can be found in Table I. We first
introduce the training parameters for classification tasks. The
cross-entropy loss is utilized to guide the training. We use an
AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 3e-4. The
label smoothing with a smoothing rate of 0.1 and a dropout
rate of 0.25 are applied to avoid over-fitting. The batch size is
64 for all datasets. The training epochs are 10, 30, and 30 for
SEED, THU-EP, and FACED. And the model with the best

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE III
E MOTION REGRESSION RESULTS ON MAHNOB-HCI.
Method

RMSE ↓

PCC ↑

CCC ↑

LSTM [25]
TCN [29]
EmT-Regr (MSA)⋆
EmT-Regr (LP+RNN)⋆
EmT-Regr (LP+LSTM)⋆
EmT-Regr (LP+GRU)⋆

0.081
0.066
0.075
0.069
0.063
0.068

0.427
0.474
0.393
0.470
0.483
0.490

0.306
0.377
0.312
0.381
0.390
0.396

↓: the lower the better; ↑: the higher the better.
:EmT-Regr (token mixer type)

⋆

TABLE IV
G ENERALIZED EMOTION CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF ABLATION
STUDIES ON THE SEED AND THU-EP DATASETS .
SEED

Method
w/o RMPG
w Single GCN
w/o TCT
w/o STA
EmT (ours)

THU-EP

ACC

F1

ACC

F1

0.775
0.773
0.777
0.784
0.802

0.793
0.760
0.749
0.795
0.821

0.577
0.551
0.592
0.582
0.595

0.663
0.642
0.698
0.690
0.724

validation accuracy is used to evaluate the test data. α in STA
is empirically selected as 0.25 for SEED, 0.1 for THU-EP
and 0.4 for FACED. For regression tasks, we use a CCC loss,
2σŷy
LCCC (ŷ, y) = 1− σ2 +σ2 +(µ
, where σŷy is the covariance,
ŷ −µy )
y
ŷ
σŷ and σy are the variances, and µŷ and µy are the means, an
Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5e-5 and a
weight decay of 1e-3, a batch size of 2, and a window length
of 96 with a hop step of 32. We train the network for 30
epochs and use the model of the last epoch to evaluate the
test data.
V. R ESULTS AND A NALYSES
A. Emotion Classification
The experimental results are shown in Table II. We evaluate
the methods using accuracy and F1 score. On the SEED
dataset, EmT-D achieves the highest accuracy (0.802) and
the highest F1 score (0.821), indicating its effectiveness in
emotion classification. EmT-B also performs well with an
accuracy of 0.788 and an F1 score of 0.793, while EmT-S
shows a slightly lower accuracy of 0.780 but a strong F1 score
of 0.759. RGNN achieves the second-best performance on the
SEED dataset with an accuracy of 0.790 and an F1 score of
0.802. Notably, the methods that use features as input generally
perform better than those using EEG as input. Additionally,
learning from the temporal sequence of features consistently
achieves better performance than learning from the features
directly, except in the case of RGNN. This indicates the
effectiveness of learning the temporal contextual information. Furthermore, compared to TCN, LSTM, TESANet, and
AMDET, EmT can learn the spatial information better with
the help of the GCN-based modules.
The observations on the THU-EP and FACED datasets are
different. For the THU-EP dataset, EmT-B achieves the best

8

F1 score of 0.724, while Conformer achieves the best accuracy (0.601). On the FACED dataset, EmT-B leads with the
second-best accuracy (0.608) and the highest F1 score (0.740).
AMDET achieves the second-best F1 score of 0.726, while the
best accuracy is achieved by TSception (0.619). As the classes
are imbalanced in both the THU-EP and FACED datasets, F1
scores are more important than accuracy. EmT-B achieves the
highest F1 scores on both THU-EP and FACED, demonstrating
its effectiveness in emotion classification. Different from the
observations on the SEED dataset, the baselines using EEG as
input achieve better performance than those using features as
input. This might be because there are more subjects in THUEP and FACED, and using EEG directly can provide more
information.
For the SEED dataset (62 channels, 15 subjects), there is a
positive correlation between the number of transformer layers
and performance, with EmT-D (8 layers) performing best due
to the enriched spatial information from the higher number
of channels. However, for the THU-EP and FACED datasets
(32 channels, more subjects), EmT-B (4 layers) achieves
better results, likely due to fewer channels and higher subject
variability, where deeper models like EmT-D tend to overfit.
Overall, EmT-B strikes a better balance between temporal and
spatial learning in datasets with fewer channels and greater
inter-subject variability.
B. Emotion Regression
The regression results are shown in Table III. According
to the results, EmT-Regr (LP+LSTM) achieved the lowest
RMSE (0.063) among all compared approaches, while EmTRegr (LP+GRU) achieved the best PCC (0.490) and CCC
(0.396), indicating the effectiveness of the proposed method.
However, when using MSA as the token mixer in EmT, the
performance reduced dramatically, falling below all compared
baselines. The difference between MSA and RNNs or TCN is
that RNNs or TCN can fuse the information globally or locally,
while MSA focuses on learning the global temporal relations
and emphasizing certain parts of the sequence. Hence, the
results indicate that fusing information from all segments is
crucial for regression tasks.
C. Ablation
To explore the contributions of the RMPG, TCT, and STA
modules, we conducted an ablation analysis by systematically
removing each layer and observing the subsequent effects on
classification performance. The results of this analysis are
detailed in Table IV. Among all the ablation experiments,
using only a single GCN had the most detrimental impact,
leading to a 2.9% and 6.1% decrease in ACC and F1 score on
the SEED dataset, and a 4.4% and 8.2% decrease on the THUEP dataset. When EmT was tested without the RMPG module,
it exhibited the second-largest reduction in accuracy on both
datasets, with decreases of 2.7% and 1.8%, respectively. Similarly, the removal of TCT and STA modules also resulted in
noticeable reductions in classification accuracy and F1 scores.
These findings highlight that all the proposed modules work
synergistically to enhance the predictive capabilities of EmT.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

1

0.9

0.6

ACC
F1

0.8

9

RMSE

0.5

PCC

CCC

0.6
ACC
F1

0.85

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.75

0.3

0.2

0.7

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.65

0.1

0

0

0.6

ACC/F1

0.4

0.6

0.3
0.4

PSD

DE

DE

rPSD

(a) Classification

rPSD

(b) Regression

2

4

6

8

Number of TCT blocks

PCC

CCC

4

6

8

0
2

(a) Classification

Fig. 3. Effect of feature types on emotion classification and regression
performances of EmT using SEED and MAHNOB-HCI. Using rPSD gives
the overall best performances. We don’t add PSD results for regression tasks
in (b) because the model cannot converge.

RMSE

Number of TCT blocks

(b) Regression

Fig. 5. Effect of the number of TCT blocks on emotion classification and
regression performances of EmT using SEED and MAHNOB-HCI.

E. Effect of The Depth and Width of GCNs in RMPG
0.9

ACC
F1

0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65

0.65
0.6

ACC
F1

0.85
ACC/F1

ACC/F1

0.9

1, 1

1, 2

2, 2

2, 3

Depth of GCN layers

(a)

0.6

8

16

32

64

Width of the GCN layers

(b)

Fig. 4. Effect of the depth (a) and width (b) of GCNs in RMPG on
classification performance using SEED. For the depth analysis, 1,1 indicates
that both GCN branches in RMPG have 1 layer each. The width is the hidden
size of GCN layer.

Furthermore, the ablation results underscore the significant
contribution of the RMPG module, attributable to its ability
to modulate dynamic spatial relations among EEG channels,
which is crucial for effectively capturing emotional activity.
D. Effect of EEG Features
Fig. 3 illustrates the impact of different feature types on
the SEED dataset for classification tasks and the MAHNOBHCI dataset for regression tasks. We compared three types of
features: PSD, DE, and rPSD, evaluating their effects on accuracy and F1 score for classification tasks, as well as on MRSE,
CCC, and PCC for regression tasks. For classification tasks,
rPSD outperformed the other two feature types, providing the
highest accuracy and F1 score. Specifically, rPSD achieved
5.9% and 11.5% higher accuracy and F1 score, respectively,
compared to EmT using DE. Furthermore, rPSD showed a
13.0% and 18.9% improvement in accuracy and F1 score,
respectively, over PSD. These results suggest that rPSD is a
superior spectral feature for EEG emotion classification tasks.
For regression tasks, using rPSD resulted in better MRSE and
CCC compared to using DE. However, the difference in PCC
between rPSD and DE was minimal, with rPSD achieving
a PCC of 0.491 and DE achieving a PCC of 0.490. Notably,
when PSD was used as a feature, the model failed to converge,
so we excluded these results from further analysis. Based on
these findings, rPSD is demonstrated to be a more effective
feature than DE, and both rPSD and DE are superior to PSD
for EEG emotion recognition tasks.

We varied the number of GCN layers (depth) and the
hidden size of the GCN layers (width) to evaluate their effects
on classification performance. EmT-D and the SEED dataset
were used for these experiments as they provide better overall
performance compared to other configurations. The results are
shown in Fig. 4. Since the RMPG module has two GCN
branches, we tested four different configurations of GCN
layers: [1, 1], [1, 2], [2, 2], and [2, 3]. These numbers represent
the number of GCN layers (depth) for each branch in RMPG.
As shown in Fig. 4 (a), the [1, 2] configuration yields the
best performance. Compared to [1, 1] and [2, 2], the results
highlight the effectiveness of the pyramid design. Additionally,
increasing the number of GCN layers leads to a significant
drop in classification performance, consistent with the oversmoothing issue in deeper GCNs [37]. In contrast, the effects
of width are relatively smaller, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). There
is a positive correlation between width and performance when
increasing the width from 8 to 32. However, the performance
declines when the width is increased further, likely due to
over-fitting caused by the larger model size.

F. Effect of The Number of TCT Blocks
We vary the number of TCT blocks from 2 to 8 and
monitor their effect on the results of the two tasks. The
results are shown in Fig. 5. For classification, shown in
Fig. 5 (a), as the number of TCT blocks increases from 2
to 8, there is a noticeable improvement in both ACC and F1
scores. Specifically, accuracy increases from 0.780 to 0.802,
while the F1 score shows a more substantial rise from 0.759
to 0.821, with the most significant improvement occurring
between 6 and 8 TCT blocks. This indicates that adding more
TCT blocks enhances the model’s ability to capture temporal
contextual information, thereby improving classification performance. Conversely, for regression tasks, shown in Fig. 5
(b), the number of TCT blocks has little to no effect on the
performance metrics. The RMSE remains stable around 0.06,
and both the PCC and CCC show minimal variation, hovering
around 0.48 and 0.39, respectively. This suggests that while
increasing TCT blocks benefits classification by improving
the capture of temporal contextual information, it does not
significantly impact regression performance.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

10

(a) SEED (62 Channels)

(a) Connectivity 1

(b) Connectivity 2

Fig. 6. Group-level connectivity of EEG channels for the emotional cognitive
process. The two connectivity plots demonstrate that different connectivities
of the brain are learned for the emotional task. (a) shows the first learned
brain connectivity. (b) shows the second learned brain connectivity.

G. Analysis of The Computational Complexity
We conducted an analysis of the computational complexity
of various models using floating-point operations (FLOPs)
and the number of parameters as evaluation metrics. For the
SEED dataset, ACC is used since the classes are balanced,
while the F1 score is used for the FACED dataset due to
its imbalanced classes. Since THU-EP and FACED share
the same data format, we evaluated results only on FACED,
which is larger than THU-EP. The results are shown in Fig 7.
TSception and Conformer are excluded from the comparison
due to their significantly higher FLOPs than the other models.
EmT-D achieves the highest ACC on SEED with relatively
comparable computational complexity. EmT-B demonstrates
higher overall decoding performance across the three datasets
with a balance between performance and computational cost.
H. Visualization
1) The learned connections: Fig. 6 illustrates the learned
connectivity of brain regions on SEED. Two learnable adjacency matrices reveal different connectivity patterns during the
emotional cognitive process. Fig. 6 clearly shows a difference
in the learned connectivities under emotion stimulation. In
Fig. 6 (a), the strongest learned connections are F6-POz, P2Fz, F7-O1, PO5-Pz, T8-P7, and FC4-FPz. These connections
indicate relationships among the frontal, parietal, and temporal
areas, which are known to be closely related to mental attention [38]. In Fig. 6 (b), the important connections learned by
EmT are FC4-P7, FT8-C5, Cz-Fz, T8-CP4, CP6-FP2, F2-TP8,
and O1-P2. These connections include interactions among
the frontal, temporal, and parietal areas, which are known to
be related to emotions [39], [40], [41]. Additionally, some
interactions involve the occipital and parietal areas, which are
associated with visual processes. This is expected as videos
were used as stimuli in the data collection experiments [22].
The two distinct patterns in Fig. 6 reflect EmT’s ability to
capture multiple cognitive connectivities for the given classification task.
2) The learned temporal contextual information: We visualized the hidden features before and after the TCT blocks to
examine 1) the nature of temporal contextual information and
2) how TCT uses it for classification and regression tasks. For
classification, we visualized the averaged features of samples

(b) FACED (32 Channels)

Fig. 7. Comparison of model performance, parameters, and FLOPS (M). The
model size is represented by the area of the circle. TSception and Conformer
are excluded due to much higher FLOPS than others. Our EmT-B achieves a
promising balance between performance and computational complexity.

within the same class for each subject, with a representative
subject in FACED used to demonstrate the learned temporal
contextual information. For regression, we visualized individual sample features, as each has a unique ground truth, and a
representative sample is used for illustration purposes.
The visualization results for the classification task are shown
in Fig. 8. Here, d represents the dimension of hidden features,
and t denotes time. ST ∈ Rseq×dg and Scls ∈ Rseq×dhead
represent the learned features before and after the TCT blocks,
respectively, with superscripts indicating class labels. As seen
in Fig. 8, the features change over time before the TCT-Clas
blocks, particularly for class 0 (low valence stimuli). After
the TCT blocks, the activations become more consistent, likely
due to self-attention focusing on parts strongly correlated with
the emotional state and the SAT layer smoothing fluctuations
by aggregating nearby temporal information. For regression,
the visualization (Fig. 9) also shows temporal changes in the
feature space, indicating the presence of temporal contextual
information. Unlike classification, the regression features are
not simply smoothed. Instead, TCT-Regr, using RNNs as
token mixers, combines evolving features across different
dimensions, resulting in a more complex representation that
is well-suited for continuous emotional state prediction. The
RNN’s ability to capture sequential dependencies allows it to
focus on key changes necessary for continuous prediction.
In summary, the changes in features before the TCT blocks
confirm the presence of temporal contextual information reflecting the dynamic nature of emotional states. The TCT
blocks handle tasks differently: in classification, features are
smoothed to enhance separability, while in regression, RNN
token mixers preserve temporal variations, enabling continuous emotional predictions.

I. Limitations and Future Work
Although our model performs better overall across datasets,
there are some limitations. First, the model’s size and computational complexity can be further optimized. Additionally, while
our model improves emotion recognition, the temporal contextual information learned remains difficult to interpret. Future
work should design experiments to pinpoint this information.
Exploring alternative methods, such as using the Riemannian
manifold to capture EEG connection patterns, would also be
a promising research direction.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

𝑆!" (Before TCT)

"
𝑆$%&
(After TCT)

d

d

t

t

11

regression tasks are conducted to evaluate EmT and relevant
baseline methods. Results on three bench-marking datasets
demonstrate EmT shows improvements over the compared
baselines. Our approach is inspired by neuropsychological
knowledge and offers a new perspective for improving decoding performance by learning multiple cognition-related graph
connections and capturing temporal contextual information.
These improvements are supported by enhanced performance
and visualizations of the learned connections and temporal features. Additionally, the visualization of the temporal features
provides insights into how different token mixers function in
classification and regression tasks.

(a) Low valance
"
𝑆$%&
(After TCT)

𝑆!" (Before TCT)

This work was supported by the RIE2020 AME Programmatic Fund, Singapore (No. A20G8b0102) and the Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under its MTC
Programmatic Funding Scheme (project no. M23L8b0049)
Scent Digitalization and Computation (SDC) Programme.

d

d

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

R EFERENCES

t

t

(b) High valance
Fig. 8. Visualization of the learned temporal features before and after
TCT blocks for the classification task. d represents the dimension of hidden
features, and t denotes time. ST ∈ Rseq×dg and Scls ∈ Rseq×dhead
represent the learned features before and after the TCT blocks, respectively,
with superscripts indicating class labels.
𝑆$ (Before TCT)

d

t
𝑆!"# (After TCT)

d

t

Fig. 9. Visualization of the learned temporal features before and after TCT
blocks for the regression task. d represents the dimension of hidden features,
and t denotes time. ST ∈ Rseq×dg and Sreg ∈ Rseq×dhead represent the
learned features before and after the TCT blocks.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a graph-transformer-based model,
EmT, for cross-subject EEG emotion recognition. RMPG is
proposed to learn multiple connection patterns for different
brain cognitive processes under emotional stimulation. TCT
is designed to learn temporal contextual information from the
temporal EEG graphs. Subject-independent classification and

[1] S. M. Alarcão and M. J. Fonseca, “Emotions recognition using EEG
signals: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 374–393, 2019.
[2] P. Li, H. Liu, Y. Si, C. Li, F. Li, X. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Zeng,
D. Yao, Y. Zhang, and P. Xu, “EEG based emotion recognition by
combining functional connectivity network and local activations,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 2869–
2881, 2019.
[3] S. K. Ehrlich, K. R. Agres, C. Guan, and G. Cheng, “A closed-loop,
music-based brain-computer interface for emotion mediation,” PloS one,
vol. 14, no. 3, p. e0213516, 2019.
[4] J. C. Yudong Pan and Y. Zhang, “A survey of deep learning-based
classification methods for steady-state visual evoked potentials,” BrainApparatus Communication: A Journal of Bacomics, vol. 2, no. 1, p.
2181102, 2023.
[5] E. Jeon, W. Ko, J. S. Yoon, and H.-I. Suk, “Mutual information-driven
subject-invariant and class-relevant deep representation learning in BCI,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 34,
no. 2, pp. 739–749, 2023.
[6] Y. Li, W. Zheng, Z. Cui, T. Zhang, and Y. Zong, “A novel neural network
model based on cerebral hemispheric asymmetry for EEG emotion
recognition,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-18, 7 2018, pp. 1561–1567.
[7] P. Zhong, D. Wang, and C. Miao, “EEG-based emotion recognition using
regularized graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1290–1301, 2022.
[8] Y. Ding, N. Robinson, S. Zhang, Q. Zeng, and C. Guan, “TSception:
Capturing temporal dynamics and spatial asymmetry from EEG for emotion recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 2238–2250, 2023.
[9] J. A. Coan and J. J. Allen, “Frontal EEG asymmetry as a moderator
and mediator of emotion,” Biological psychology, vol. 67, no. 1-2, pp.
7–50, 2004.
[10] Y. Li, W. Zheng, Z. Cui, T. Zhang, and Y. Zong, “A novel neural network
model based on cerebral hemispheric asymmetry for EEG emotion
recognition.” in IJCAI, 2018, pp. 1561–1567.
[11] D. Huang, S. Chen, C. Liu, L. Zheng, Z. Tian, and D. Jiang, “Differences
first in asymmetric brain: A bi-hemisphere discrepancy convolutional
neural network for EEG emotion recognition,” Neurocomputing, vol.
448, pp. 140–151, 2021.
[12] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, and Z. Cui, “EEG emotion recognition using
dynamical graph convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 532–541, 2020.
[13] T. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Xu, and C. L. P. Chen, “GCB-Net: Graph
convolutional broad network and its application in emotion recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 379–388,
2022.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[14] H. Kober, L. F. Barrett, J. Joseph, E. Bliss-Moreau, K. Lindquist, and
T. D. Wager, “Functional grouping and cortical–subcortical interactions
in emotion: A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies,” NeuroImage,
vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 998 – 1031, 2008.
[15] P. Praamstra, L. Boutsen, and G. W. Humphreys, “Frontoparietal control
of spatial attention and motor intention in human EEG,” Journal of
Neurophysiology, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 764–774, 2005.
[16] A. J. Watrous, N. Tandon, C. R. Conner, T. Pieters, and A. D. Ekstrom,
“Frequency-specific network connectivity increases underlie accurate
spatiotemporal memory retrieval,” Nature neuroscience, vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 349–356, 2013.
[17] Y. Zhang, H. Liu, D. Zhang, X. Chen, T. Qin, and Q. Zheng, “EEG-based
emotion recognition with emotion localization via hierarchical selfattention,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 2458–2469, 2023.
[18] T. Song, S. Liu, W. Zheng, Y. Zong, and Z. Cui, “Instance-adaptive graph
for EEG emotion recognition,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 03, pp. 2701–2708, Apr. 2020.
[19] W. Yu, M. Luo, P. Zhou, C. Si, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, J. Feng, and S. Yan,
“MetaFormer is actually what you need for vision,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2022, pp. 10 819–10 829.
[20] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[21] P. Verduyn, P. Delaveau, J.-Y. Rotgé, P. Fossati, and I. V. Mechelen,
“Determinants of emotion duration and underlying psychological and
neural mechanisms,” Emotion Review, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 330–335, 2015.
[22] W.-L. Zheng and B.-L. Lu, “Investigating critical frequency bands
and channels for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 162–175, 2015.
[23] X. Hu, F. Wang, and D. Zhang, “Similar brains blend emotion in
similar ways: Neural representations of individual difference in emotion
profiles,” Neuroimage, vol. 247, p. 118819, 2022.
[24] J. Chen, X. Wang, C. Huang, X. Hu, X. Shen, and D. Zhang, “A large
finer-grained affective computing EEG dataset,” Scientific Data, vol. 10,
p. 740, 2023.
[25] M. Soleymani, S. Asghari-Esfeden, Y. Fu, and M. Pantic, “Analysis of
EEG signals and facial expressions for continuous emotion detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 17–28,
2016.
[26] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 29. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2016.
[27] R. Levie, F. Monti, X. Bresson, and M. M. Bronstein, “CayleyNets:
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks With Complex Rational Spectral
Filters,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 67, no. 1, pp.
97–109, 2019.
[28] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[29] S. Zhang, C. Tang, and C. Guan, “Visual-to-EEG cross-modal knowledge distillation for continuous emotion recognition,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 130, p. 108833, 2022.
[30] C. Tong, Y. Ding, K. L. Jun Liang, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, and C. Guan,
“TESANet: Self-attention network for olfactory EEG classification,” in
2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2022,
pp. 1–7.
[31] Y. Song, Q. Zheng, B. Liu, and X. Gao, “EEG Conformer: Convolutional
transformer for EEG decoding and visualization,” IEEE Transactions on
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 31, pp. 710–719,
2023.
[32] Y. Xu, Y. Du, L. Li, H. Lai, J. Zou, T. Zhou, L. Xiao, L. Liu, and
P. Ma, “AMDET: Attention based multiple dimensions EEG transformer
for emotion recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing,
vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1067–1077, 2024.
[33] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2018.
[34] Q. Li, Z. Han, and X.-m. Wu, “Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for semi-supervised learning,” Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1, Apr. 2018.
[35] X. Shen, X. Liu, X. Hu, D. Zhang, and S. Song, “Contrastive learning of subject-invariant EEG representations for cross-subject emotion

12

recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 2496–2511, 2023.
[36] G. Zhang, M. Yu, Y.-J. Liu, G. Zhao, D. Zhang, and W. Zheng,
“SparseDGCNN: Recognizing emotion from multichannel EEG signals,”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 537–548,
2023.
[37] J. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Liu, A. B. Chan, and Y.-G. Fu, “Another perspective
of over-smoothing: Alleviating semantic over-smoothing in deep GNNs,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pp. 1–14,
2024.
[38] Y. Liu, J. Bengson, H. Huang, G. R. Mangun, and M. Ding, “Top-down
Modulation of Neural Activity in Anticipatory Visual Attention: Control
Mechanisms Revealed by Simultaneous EEG-fMRI,” Cerebral Cortex,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 517–529, 09 2014.
[39] Y. Gao, Z. Cao, J. Liu, and J. Zhang, “A novel dynamic brain network in
arousal for brain states and emotion analysis,” Mathematical Biosciences
and Engineering, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 7440–7463, 2021.
[40] D. Huang, C. Guan, K. K. Ang, H. Zhang, and Y. Pan, “Asymmetric
spatial pattern for EEG-based emotion detection,” in The 2012 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2012, pp.
1–7.
[41] K. R. Mickley Steinmetz and E. A. Kensinger, “The effects of valence
and arousal on the neural activity leading to subsequent memory,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1190–1199, 2009.

