Plug-and-Play Domain Adaptation for Cross-Subject
EEG-based Emotion Recognition
Li-Ming Zhao,1 Xu Yan, 3 Bao-Liang Lu 1 2

Introduction
The emerging affective computing aims at detecting, recognizing, processing, and responding to people’s affected
states. It has broad prospects in many fields of applications
in daily life, ranging from specific scenarios such as medical
treatment, intelligent education, and entertainment to general affect-sensitive systems like brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs), among which emotion recognition is the primary
step and the milestone (Brunner et al. 2015). Recently, EEGbased emotion recognition has greatly attracted researchers’
interest for its information sufficiency (Alarcao and Fonseca 2017) and stable neural patterns over time (Zheng,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Poor User Experience Excellent

Human emotion decoding in affective brain-computer interfaces suffers a major setback due to the inter-subject variability of electroencephalography (EEG) signals. Existing approaches usually require amassing extensive EEG data of
each new subject, which is prohibitively time-consuming
along with poor user experience. To tackle this issue, we divide EEG representations into private components specific to
each subject and shared emotional components that are universal to all subjects. According to this representation partition, we propose a plug-and-play domain adaptation method
for dealing with the inter-subject variability. In the training
phase, subject-invariant emotional representations and private
components of source subjects are separately captured by a
shared encoder and private encoders. Furthermore, we build
one emotion classifier on the shared partition and subjects’
individual classifiers on the combination of these two partitions. In the calibration phase, the model only requires few
unlabeled EEG data from incoming target subjects to model
their private components. Therefore, besides the shared emotion classifier, we have another pipeline to use the knowledge
of source subjects through the similarity of private components. In the test phase, we integrate predictions of the shared
emotion classifier with those of individual classifiers ensemble after modulation by similarity weights. Experimental results on the SEED dataset show that our model greatly shortens the calibration time within a minute while maintaining
the recognition accuracy, all of which make emotion decoding more generalizable and practicable.

subject 1-4
happy
neutral
sad

algorithm 1
algorithm 2
algorithm 3

Performance

Abstract

Good

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 200240
2
Center for Brain-Machine Interface and Neuromodulation,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 200020
3
Department of Linguistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 98195
{lm zhao, bllu}@sjtu.edu.cn, xyan3@uw.edu

Bad

1

∗

Calibration time

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of the domain-shift challenges and
the dilemma of constructing practical EEG-based affective
models. (a) Individual differences of EEG signals of four
subjects with three classes of emotions. (b) A rough display
of the trade-off dilemma between algorithm performance
and user experience.

Zhu, and Lu 2019). However, EEG data is highly subjectdependent due to the structural and functional variability between subjects (Samek, Meinecke, and Müller 2013), like
mental states, electrode impedance, head shapes, etc. Figure
1(a) illustrates the inter-subject variability of emotional EEG
data, which brings great challenges of constructing practical
EEG-based affective models. This shortage definitely hinders developments and applications of affective computing
on a large scale.
The obstacle mentioned above has motivated many researchers to develop practical emotion recognition algorithms. The conventional method to deal with this problem
is to collect a large amount of data from the new subject,
label them, and use them to customize the classifier parameters before the test stage. Unfortunately, this demand
is time-consuming and causes poor user experience, which
makes the model less practical. Another route is using transfer learning methods (Pan and Yang 2009) to deal with the
individual differences. The transfer learning can be roughly
divided into domain adaptation (DA) and domain generalization (DG) according to whether the data of the target domain is used in the model training phase. For the practical
application of emotion recognition, DA is inefficient due to
the use of all target data, and DG may suffer from its generalization ability as it does not rely on any information from

target subjects. Contrary to the extremes of the DA and DG,
it is acceptable and necessary to introduce a short-term calibration stage before the real-time recognition starts. Figure
1(b) subjectively exhibits a trade-off dilemma between algorithm performance and user experience. However, existing
research has indicated that if the number of training data is
small compared to the dimensions of the feature vectors, the
model will most probably break down (Lotte et al. 2007).
Thus, it is challenging to achieve good DA results with limited target training data.
To address the problems above, we propose a plug-andplay domain adaptation method that can calibrate with few
unlabeled target data without sacrificing the recognition accuracy. We hypothetically divide EEG representations into
shared emotional components that are universal to all subjects and private components specific to each subject. We
use Long Short-Term Memory Auto-Encoder Neural Network and explicit loss functions to separate the private components, and in the process produce representations that are
more meaningful for emotion recognition. However, we believe the single shared classifier built in shared emotional
space still has limited ability for the new subject never been
seen. Thus, we additionally build a series of individual classifiers for existing source subjects, the purpose of which is to
provide a reference for new subjects. By reconstructing the
few calibration data, we can quickly construct new subjects’
private encoder together with the trained shared encoder
and decoder enforced. Thus, the target subjects can borrow
the knowledge from source individual classifiers through
the similarity of private components and strengthen emotion prediction together with the shared classifier. The private components are the main reasons for the inter-subject
variability and remain unchanged within one collection once
the EEG sensors are set up, which is the key to shorten calibration time. In addition, we hope to use the attention mechanism to automatically learn the critical EEG channels and
frequency bands most relevant to emotion recognition.

Related Work
The debut of transfer learning has received a surge of attention and has quickly become an important method to
deal with inter-subject variability in BCI. There are two
main branches in transfer learning that can help reduce the
subject-invariability. One is domain adaptation (DA) (BenDavid et al. 2010). DA methods increase the accuracy of the
target data by minimizing domain shifts between source and
target domains, indicating that during the training phase, we
must have got the data from the target domain. Zheng and
Lu (2016) first introduced the transductive parameter transfer (TPT) (Sangineto et al. 2014), a kind of DA method,
to EEG-based cross-subject emotion recognition and got
a decent result. Especially, the Domain-Adversarial Neural Networks (DANNs) (Ganin et al. 2016), trying to find
the shared representations among all domains specific to
the task, pushed the accuracy up to another record high (Li
et al. 2018). Bousmalis et al. (2016) noticed that in the core
idea of DANNs, the shared representations are sensitive to
the noise correlated with the underlying shared distribution,
and proposed the novel Domain Separation Networks (DSN)

to learn domain-invariant representations. Nevertheless, no
matter how DA achieves knowledge transfer, all methods
demand all target information, which is applicable to the
offline datasets transfer, but cannot be reached in real-time
BCI applications.
This implicit shortage urges researchers to turn to domain generalization (DG) for help. DG methods can extract domain-invariant features by exploiting domain differences across multiple source subjects without the need to
acquire any data from the target subjects (Blanchard, Lee,
and Scott 2011). Domain-Invariant Component Analysis
(DICA) (Muandet, Balduzzi, and Schölkopf 2013) and Scatter Component Analysis (SCA) (Ghifary, Balduzzi, Kleijn,
and Zhang 2016) are two examples. Ma et al. (2019) compared the results of these two approaches and proposed a
novel framework called Domain Residual Network (DResNet). In this model, weights are explicitly divided into biased weights that are exclusive to each domain and unbiased weights that are shared by all domains. DResNet, a robust model with better generalization ability for incoming
domains gained from unbiased weights, can speak for the
state-of-the-art performance of DG methods that are often
used in EEG-based emotion recognition tasks.
While DG methods seem more likely to be implemented
in the real world, some questions are still worth thinking
about. Is the DG methods’ restriction of no demand for
target data the most suitable for real-time application scenarios? Although long-term calibration will result in poor
user experience, we can still collect few target data through
shorter-term calibration to adapt to target subject quickly.
Li et al. (2019) utilized the style transfer mapping (STM)
method to reduce the domain differences with the support of
a small amount of labeled target data. They used three sessions of labeled EEG data about ten minutes in total during
calibration stage for three-kind emotion recognition task. Li
et al. have achieved excellent results, but the 10-minute calibration time is still long for practical use. What’s more, STM
requires labeled data to cover all categories, which means
that the calibration time will be further increased with the
expansion of emotion categories.
Anothor key point that influences the adaptation time is
that EEG signals contain too much information. Ahern and
Schwartz (1985) found that our brain shows lateralization in
emotions, and some regions and frequency bands are more
informative than others with different emotions. Zheng and
Lu (2015) confirmed the existence of relevance between
neural signatures and different emotions. Besides, they also
assigned the critical channels and frequency bands according to the weights given by the trained Deep Belief Networks in emotion recognition tasks. By contrast, the prevalent attention mechanism originated from image processing
(Mnih et al. 2014) and natural language processing (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017) offers
the new possibility to solve the problem.

Classifer Cp1

Calibration Phase
Calibration
Data
Data X"

Classifer Cpn



Random
Source Data

...

Shared Encoder

Classifer C

/c_s

Shared Classifer

LSTM Es

LSTM Es

/ similarity

Target Data
Data Xt



Training Phase

Test Phase

Private Source
Encoders

...

Similarity
Weights

Private Target
Encoder

Private Source
Classifers
...

Shared Encoder

Shared
Classifer

Classifier
Fusion

Existing
Subjects

/ recon

LSTM D

LSTM Ds

Shared Encoder

Attention-based Pooling





New Subject

Shared Decoder
/ difference

Shared Decoder
/ difference



LSTM Epn

LSTM Ept

/ c_p

Classifer Cp2

LSTM Ep2

Private Target
Encoder

/recon

LSTM Ep1

...

Data Xsn

Private Source
Classifers

...

...

Data Xs#

Private Source
Encoders

Attention-based Pooling

Data Xs!

Attention-based Pooling

Source Data

Figure 2: The framework of proposed PPDA. The whole structure can be divided into training phase, calibration phase, and test
phase. The submodules in the training phase will be optimized enforced by the combination of several loss functions. In the
calibration phase, only the private target encoder, highlighted in gray, will be updated. In the test phase, the final predictions
will be made by two pipelines. The red directional lines mark the data flow of new subject, while dark mark the source.

Methods
Overview
To get over the inter-subject variability of EEG signals and
execute the task of rapid emotion recognition on new subjects, we propose a novel plug-and-play domain adaptation
(PPDA) method. The framework of PPDA is depicted in Figure 2. The whole structure can be divided into a training
phase, a calibration phase, and a test phase. In the training
phase, the attention-based pooling is first applied to utilize
the spatial information of critical channels and bands of EEG
signals. Then, Long Short-Term Memory based encoderdecoder scheme is adopted to explore the temporal dependency. We raise a shared encoder Es and private encoders
Ep1∼n to capture the subject-invariant emotional representations and private components, respectively. By using the
outputs of the encoders, we further build a shared classifier
Cs and individual classifiers Cp1∼n to recognize emotions
simultaneously. In this stage, only labeled source data are
adopted to train the model. In the calibration phase, we use
the data from the very beginning of one collection to model
the private component of the new subject with the help of
a trained Es and decoder Ds , which we call the calibration phase. Therefore, in the test phase, we can not only use
the pipeline of the shared classifier as domain generalization methods do, but also obtain knowledge from the private
classifiers through the similarity with private source components. Finally, the classifier fusion strategy is applied to
integrate the two recognition results. To make the description clearer and avoid confusion, we summarize the notations and our algorithm in Table 1 and Algorithm 1, respectively.

Attention-based Pooling
Inspired by the biological evidence from Ahern and
Schwartz (1985) and the previous work of Zheng and Lu
(2015), we attempt to introduce the attention mechanism to

let the model automatically explore the critical channels and
bands for emotion recognition. We use xt ∈ Rm as the annotation of one EEG feature vector at time t, where m is
the feature dimensionality. Each dimension of xt represents
information from a specific channel at a band. We obtain
the weighted EEG feature vector x
et with x
et =AT (xt ), where
AT means the Attention-based Pooling. Specifically, xt is
input into a single layer fully connected neural network, and
the normalized weight vector αt ∈ Rm , representing the
importance of each dimension of xt , is measured through a
softmax function as:
αt = sof tmax(Wa xt + ba ).

(1)

After that, we calculate x
et as the weighted new EEG feature
as:
x
et = αt · xt .
(2)
For each element in αt , the larger the value, the more crucial its corresponding dimension, i.e. the channel at this
band. The weight matrix Wa ∈ Rm×m and the bias vector ba ∈ Rm are randomly initialized and fine-tuned during
the training process.

Notation

Meaning

Xs ={Xsj , Ysj }nj=1

source labeled dataset of n subjects
unlabeled calibration data and target data
shared encoder, decoder, emotion
classifier, and domain classifier
private source encoders and emotion classifiers, with j = 1, 2, ..., n
private encoder of the target subject

Xc , Xt
Es , Ds , Cs , Cd
Epj , Cpj
Ept

Table 1. Notation Summary

Algorithm 1: Plug-and-play domain adaptation
Input:
Source data Xs ={Xsj , Ysj }nj=1 .
Target calibration data Xc from time 0 to T .
Target test data Xt .
Output: Recognition accuracy of target subject data.
Training Phase:
1∼n
1 Randomly initialize Ep
, Es , Cp1∼n , Cs , and
Ds .
2 for j=1:n do
3
Optimize AT , Epj , Es , Cpj , Cs , and Ds by
minimizing Equation (5).
4 end
1∼n
5 return AT , Ep
, Es , Cp1∼n , Cs , and Ds .
Calibration Phase:
t
6 Randomly initialize Ep .
7 Obtain the trained AT , Es , and Ds .
e 0 =Ds (Es (AT (Xc )) + E t (AT (Xc )))
8 Calculate X
p
t
9 Optimize Ep through minimizing Equation (8).
t
10 return Ep .
Test Phase
:
11 for target data series xt in Xt do
1∼n
12
Randomly select Xrand
from Xs .
13
Calculate the similarity weight ws between
1∼n
)) and Ept (AT (xt ))
Ep1∼n (AT (Xrand
14
Prediction of weighted private source
classifiers:
ŷpt =ws · Cp1∼n (Ept (AT (xt )) + Es (AT (xt )))
15
Prediction of shared classifier:
ŷst =Cs (Es (AT (xt )))
16
Integrate predictions: ŷ t =CF (ŷpt , ŷst )
17 end
t
18 return ŷ .

Two kinds of encoders are designed to extract the shared
emotional components and private components of EEG representations separately. Depending on the concatenation of
these two components, a shared decoder is applied to reconstruct the input EEG representations.
e = {e
Consider an EEG series x
x1 , x
e2 , · · · , x
el } of time
step l, where each point x
ei ∈ Rm is an m-dimensional
EEG feature modulated by the attention mechanism of one
subject. Figure 3 depicts the inference steps in an LSTM
Encoder-Decoder reconstruction model for an EEG series
with l = 4. The EEG feature x
ei at time ti and the hidden
state hi−1
Es of the shared encoder at time ti−1 are used to calculate hiEs . The hidden state hiEp of the private encoder is
simultaneously calculated. The combination of hidden states
h4Es and h4Ep initializes h4Ds of the shared decoder as:

LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder

L = Lc s + αLc p + βLrecon + γLdifference + δLsimilarity , (5)

h4Ds = h4Es + h4Ep .

Just like Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le (2014) did, the decoder reconstructs the EEG feature series in a reverse order,
i.e. {e
x04 , x
e03 , x
e02 , x
e01 }. A linear layer on top of the decoder is
e0i to ensure
used to establish a mapping between hiDs and x
0
the reconstructed EEG feature x
ei has the same dimensions
with the input EEG feature x
ei . Then, the shared decoder uses
e0i to infer x
e0i−1 . In particular, x
e4 is used to fire the
hiDs and x
decoding process and thereby form the entire series graduei to represent
ally. In order to distinguish it from x
ei , we use x
the EEG series {e
xi−l+1 , x
ei−l+2 , ..., x
ei } with a time step of l
at time ti , which is the basic input unit of LSTM. To clarify,
eji stands for the EEG series from subject j at time ti , and
x
we use the emotion label yij of x
ei as the label of the entire
series.

Learning Loss

where it , ft , gt , ot are the input, forget, cell, and output
gates. ht and ct are the hidden state and the cell state at time
t, while ht−1 is the hidden state of the layer at time t − 1
or the initial hidden state at the very beginning. σ represents
the sigmoid function, and is the Hadamard product.

x2’

x1’

x3’

~

~

!

"

x4’
WhDs+ b



hDs

hDs

hDs

hD s


hEs

hEs

!
hEs

"
hEs

Encoding

(3)

~

~


hEp
~

x1

!
hEp

hEp
~

x2

~

x3

Decoding

In the training phase, only labeled EEG data of existing
source subjects are utilized to train the model, which aims
to minimize to following loss:

As LSTM neural networks have demonstrated their effectiveness for extracting temporal dependencies in EEG-based
emotion recognition (Kim and Jo 2020), we choose LSTM
to construct the Encoder-Decoder architecture. For each element in the input series, the LSTM unit computes the following functions in Equation (3):
it = σ(Wii xt + bii + Whi ht−1 + bhi ),
ft = σ(Wif xt + bif + Whf ht−1 + bhf ),
gt = tanh(Wig xt + big + Whg ht−1 + bhg ),
ot = σ(Wio xt + bio + Who ht−1 + bho ),
ct = ft ct−1 + it gt ,
ht = ot tanh(ct ),

(4)

"
hEp
~

x4

Figure 3: The LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder reconstruction with EEG series input {e
x1 , x
e2 , x
e3 , x
e4 } and output
{e
x01 , x
e02 , x
e03 , x
e04 }. The blue lines and black dashed lines are
applied to avoid unsightly intersections.

where α, β, γ, δ are trade-offs that control the synergy of the
loss terms. We minimize the cross-entropy loss of emotion
classifiers as:
X j
j
yi log ŷi,s
,
Lc s = −
i,j

(6)

X j
j
Lc p = −
yi log ŷi,p
,
i,j

where yij is the ground truth emotion label for input xji from
j
j
are the softmax predictions
and ŷi,p
specific j th subject. ŷi,s
of the shared classifier and the corresponding private classifier:
j
ŷi,s
= Cs (Es (e
xji )),

(7)

j
= Cpj (Es (e
ŷi,p
xji ) + Epj (e
xji )).

We use the mean squared error to calculate the reconstruction loss Lrecon :
2

Lrecon =

1 e
e0 ,
X −X
k
2

(8)
2

where k is the number of EEG features, and k·k2 is the
squared L2 -norm. The difference loss Ldifference is applied
to encourage the shared and private encoders to encode different aspects of the inputs:
n

2
1X
>
Ldifference =
Hjs Hjp ,
n j=1
F

(9)

2

e j ),
where k·kF is the squared Frobenius norm, Hjs = Es (X
j
j ej
and Hp = Ep (X ). Driven by the idea of extracting the
subject-invariant emotional representations, we train a domain classifier Cd to confuse the shared encoder via a Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL). The GRL works as an identity
function during forward propagation, but reverses the gradient direction in backward. The Lsimilarity is calculated as:
X
Lsimilarity =
di log(dˆi ),
(10)
i

where di is the ground truth domain label and dˆi =
Cd (Cs (e
xi )).

Calibration and Test
Since the EEG data is chronologically recorded, we can only
take the data from the very beginning as the calibration data.
We first initialize the parameters randomly of the private target encoder Ept , and optimize them with the reconstruction
loss and the different loss by Equation (8) and Equation (9)
using the calibration data. We believe that once the task is
settled, the shared encoder Es is generalized enough and
would have the ability to extract subject-invariant emotion
components, and Ds would work well in data reconstruction. Therefore, the parameters of Es and Ds will stay unchanged during the back-propagation and when the joint loss
reaches the minimum, Ept characterizes the individual differences of the current subject the best.

In the test phase, once a target series xt is collected, we
esj as
randomly choose data in the same length from each X
1∼n
e
Xrand , simultaneously. The performance of our model is ensured by two pipelines. One uses the trained shared classifier like most domain generalization methods do to guarantee the generalization ability as ŷst =Cs (Es (AT (xt ))). For
the other pipeline, we calculate the cosine similarity ws be1∼n
tween Ep1∼n (AT (Xrand
)) and Ept (AT (xt )) to make use
of the private information. The higher weight indicates that
the distribution is more similar with target data, thus, more
trust can be given to the corresponding classifier. Then we
get the prediction ŷpt by the dot product of the weight vector
and the result vector of Cp1∼n . The final result is determined
after the integration of these two labels through a classifier
fusion strategy following Lu et al. (2015).

Experiments
Dataset and Protocols
We verify the performance of our PPDA model on SEED
(Zheng and Lu 2015), a public affective EEG dataset for
emotion recognition. Fifteen rigorously screened Chinese
movie clips are used to elicit the desired target emotion
among happy, sad, and neutral. 15 subjects (8 females,
mean: 23.27, std: 2.37) participated in the experiments three
times on different days. During the experiment, subjects are
encouraged to immerse themselves in the video to arouse
corresponding emotions. The 62-channel EEG signals are
recorded during the movie watching with the international
10-20 system using the ESI Neuroscan system. The preprocessed data are downsampled to 200 Hz and filtered with a
bandpass of 0-75 Hz. Different entropy (DE) features are extracted within a non-overlapping one-second time window
from 5 frequency bands (namely δ: 1-3 Hz, θ: 4-7 Hz, α:
8-13 Hz, β: 14-30 Hz, and γ: 31-50 Hz) of every sample
(Duan, Zhu, and Lu 2013). Therefore, in total, there are 3394
samples of 310 features per subject in one experiment, calculated by 62 channels multiplied by 5 bands.

Implementation Details
In order to compare with the state-of-the-art results, we align
with their assessment details in this paper. Specifically, only
one experiment from each subject is involved in the leaveone-subject-out cross strategy to study the inter-subject variability. In each iteration, we select one subject as the target
new subject and the other 14 as the existing source subjects.
It should be noted that although we do not use labeled emotion data in the calibration phase, all the 3394 sample points
in SEED are labeled. Therefore, in the calibration phase, we
take the first T second data as our calibration data after discarding the emotional tag.
The layer number, the hidden size, and the time step of
the LSTM are fixed to 2, 64, and 15, respectively. Emotion classifiers and domain classifier are single-layer fully
connected networks with hidden dimensions of 64. The calibration time T is set to 45 s. T For the trade-offs that control the synergy of the loss terms, the parameters are randomly sought, i.e. α ∈ {k ∗ 10−1 |k ∈ {1, ..., 9}, β ∈

0.870

#ATD

Avg.

Std.

None

0.567

0.163

0.694
0.853
0.640
0.752
0.792
0.838
0.871
0.854
0.867

0.078
0.080
0.146
0.128
0.131
0.086
0.071
0.071
0.071

None

All

None
Few

Table 2. Results of different methods running on SEED.
#ATD is the abbreviation for the amount of target data used
for model training.
{k ∗ 10−4 |k ∈ {1, ..., 5}, γ ∈ {k ∗ 10−5 |k ∈ {1, ..., 3} and
δ ∈ {k ∗ 10−2 |k ∈ {1, ..., 3}. Adam optimizer is applied as
the optimizing function, and the learning rate is selected in
{2k ∗ 10−4 |k ∈ [−5, 5]}. The whole model is implemented
by PyTorch.

Experiment Results
Comparison with state-of-the-art methods To validate
the efficiency of our PPDA model, we compare the performance with that of the other seven popular methods on the
cross-subject emotion recognition task on SEED. The mean
accuracies (avg.) and standard deviations (std.) are reported
in Table 2. At the same time, the methods are grouped according to the number of target data used in the model training. The traditional support vector machine (SVM) is taken
as the baseline, in which 14 source data are regarded as
training data to train one SVM and test the remaining target
data. As shown in the above, the traditional SVM has poor
recognition results due to the inter-subject variability. In all,
PPDA gets a stable and decent result with about 86.7% accuracy with the standard deviation around 0.071. For DG
methods that don’t rely on any target data during model
training, such as DICA and DResNet (Ma et al. 2019), our
model improves the accuracy by 22.71% and 1.41%, respectively, which demonstrates that even using a small amount of
target data will improve the recognition performance of the
model. When compared with the DA methods, our model
outperforms all of them except for WGANDA with a slight
decrease (Zheng and Lu 2016; Luo et al. 2018). Although
the recognition performance of our method is not the optimal one, it greatly shortens the calibration time while maintaining the recognition accuracy, which is of great practical
significance. We also omit the calibration session of PPDA,
noted as PPDA NC, with other parts unchanged and run on
the SEED experiment again to check its generalization ability. The reduced recognition performance demonstrates the
importance of the calibration phase, which will be discussed
in detail in the next section.

0.865

Performance

Methods
Baseline SVM (Zheng and
Lu 2016)
DICA (Ma et al. 2019)
DResNet (Ma et al. 2019)
TCA (Zheng and Lu 2016)
TPT (Zheng and Lu 2016)
DANN (Li et al. 2018)
DAN (Li et al. 2018)
WGANDA (Luo et al. 2018)
PPDA NC
PPDA

0.860
0.855
0.850
0.845
0.840

NC

15

30

45

60

75

80

95

Calibration time (s)

Figure 4: Performance of PPDA with different calibration
data amounts. NC means without calibration.

Calibration data amount The purpose of employing the
calibration phase is to enhance the model performance by
tailoring the parameters with incoming data. However, it’s
hard to determine how many data is optimal since we hope to
keep a balance between the buffer time it generates and the
model accuracy. In order to study the effect of the calibration
time on model performance and find the appropriate length
of calibration data, we depict the accuracy change with respect to the increase of calibration data amount in Figure
4. As presented in Figure 4, once the calibration process is
added, the performance of the model significantly improves
as expected, which emphasizes the importance of the calibration. Generally speaking, the performance of the model
will increase with the extension of calibration time. However, we do not see a significant growth as the calibration
time becomes longer. The discrepancy is mainly attributed to
the unique properties of EEG signals as we discussed at the
beginning. Indeed, the EEG data are highly sensitive to external factors like the electrode impedance and head shapes,
and internal variables such as the mental states. Despite the
fact that it is easy to be affected, in one acquisition, the private components remain basically unchanged because those
factors are relatively stable during a certain period. In other
words, we can model the private components of the target
subject well even with few calibration data and use it to
improve the overall performance. Given that few data have
happy
neutral
sad

private components
subject-invariant
emotional components

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Feature visualization of PPDA. (a) The color represents different subjects, and the shapes represent the emotional categories. (b) The circle stand for the private components and dots in the middle represents the shared emotional
components. The bright green in both pictures represents the
target subject.

Verification of LSTM-based encoder-decoder The
encoder-decoder is supposed to separate the shared components that are constant and the private components various
among subjects. To certify that the structure works properly,
we randomly pick out 50 EEG samples from each subject
to visualize them with t-SNE (Vazquez et al. 2013) via a
scatter plot as displayed in Figure 5(a). Figure 5(b) exhibits
the output of the shared encoder and private encoders.
As can be seen, after PPDA codes, EEG representations
reshape from a mess with personal characteristics to shared
emotional components and private components. The solid
dots with different shapes in Figure 5(b) represent the
shared emotional components of the source subjects and
the hollow circles are the private components specific to
each subject. When new data come in, as the bright green
shows, it is interesting that some dots perfectly fall into
the places where the shared components gather while the
others allocate randomly elsewhere. The same distribution
of these two with that of source data indicates that the
shared encoder successfully extracts the components that
the most relevant to emotions and eliminates the intersubject variability. Notice that the distance between any
two private groups are not equivalent. It is certain that the
output of Ept will be closer to some than others since they
may have similar private components like identical gender,
age, cultural background, etc. Therefore, we measure the
distance and give them a weight to increase the reliability.
Attention mechanism The attention mechanism is
adopted here to automatically assign a weight to each
dimension of the EEG feature. To intuitively study the
relevance of channels and bands to emotions, we visualize
the weights as shown in Figure 6. In Figure 6(a), it is
obvious that the Beta and the Gamma bands are much more
activated than other three bands. Moreover, the distribution
of the color depth even exposes the feasibility of using it
to recognize emotion. For example, in Beta band, the blue
goes deeper when happy emotion is aroused. So does the
Gamma band in both neutral and sad feelings. In Figure
6(b), we plot the topographical EEG maps reflecting the
distributions of crucial channels. The darker the brain
region, the more important the channels in this area. Lateral
temporal lobes where FT7, FT8, T7, and T8 channels lie
are triggered intensively. The consistency between our
findings and the existing observations on critical bands
and channels for EEG-based emotion recognition Zheng
and Lu (2015) confirms that the attention mechanism has
the ability to catch the emotion-sensitive properties, which
is more reliable and interpretable than previous ways of
assigning weights, particularly subjective manual labeling.
Besides, the centralization of decisive components offers a
possibility to develop compact EEG devices to make realworld applications practicable. Meanwhile, the reduction of
channels will also significantly reduce model’s calculation
time, which is crucial to real-time applications.

H N S S N H S N H

Frequency Bands
Gamma Beta Alpha Theta Delta

brought enough information we need, the performance of
the model does not rise with the increase of calibration data.

0

H N S N H S

(a)

3394

Time (s)
Theta

Delta
Alpha

Beta

Gamma

(b)

Figure 6: Visualization of attention weight. (a) The distribution of weights over time in one experiment. The vertical
axis shows the arrangement of bands and channels in 310dimension EEG feature. The capital letters at the top represent the ground truth label at the corresponding time (H:
happy, N: neutral, S: sad). (b) The weight distribution of different brain regions in five frequency bands.

Conclusion
In this paper, we devise a methodology called plug-andplay domain adaptation for cross-subject EEG-based emotion recognition, aiming to allow everyone immediately use
it without waiting while maintaining the recognition accuracy. It has managed to shorten the calibration time within
a minute with the accuracy over 86.7%, a comparable result
to the state-of-the-art domain adaptation performance. This
technique can be used to enhance user experience and make
EEG-based affective computing applications more practicable. Moreover, the critical frequency channels and bands discovered through the attention mechanism sheds lights on the
development of wearable EEG devices and real-time emotion recognition. Our future work will concentrate on the
real-time test under various actual environments to see its
practicability since the current results are still based on simulations of real applications on offline datasets.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China (Grant
2017YFB1002501), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61673266 and No. 61976135),
SJTU Trans-med Awards Research (WF540162605), the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities,
and the 111 Project.

References
Ahern, G. L.; and Schwartz, G. E. 1985. Differential lateralization for positive and negative emotion in the human brain:
EEG spectral analysis. Neuropsychologia 23(6): 745–755.

Lu, Y.; Zheng, W.-L.; Li, B.; and Lu, B.-L. 2015. Combining
eye movements and eeg to enhance emotion recognition. In
IJCAI, volume 15, 1170–1176. Citeseer.

Alarcao, S. M.; and Fonseca, M. J. 2017. Emotions recognition using EEG signals: A survey. IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing 10(3): 374–393.

Luo, Y.; Zhang, S.-Y.; Zheng, W.-L.; and Lu, B.-L. 2018.
WGAN domain adaptation for EEG-based emotion recognition. In International Conference on Neural Information
Processing, 275–286. Springer.

Bahdanau, D.; Cho, K.; and Bengio, Y. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. In
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015.

Ma, B.-Q.; Li, H.; Zheng, W.-L.; and Lu, B.-L. 2019. Reducing the subject variability of EEG signals with adversarial domain generalization. In International Conference on
Neural Information Processing, 30–42. Springer.

Ben-David, S.; Blitzer, J.; Crammer, K.; Kulesza, A.;
Pereira, F.; and Vaughan, J. W. 2010. A theory of learning
from different domains. Machine Learning 79(1-2): 151–
175.

Mnih, V.; Heess, N.; Graves, A.; et al. 2014. Recurrent models of visual attention. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2204–2212.

Blanchard, G.; Lee, G.; and Scott, C. 2011. Generalizing
from several related classification tasks to a new unlabeled
sample. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2178–2186.
Bousmalis, K.; Trigeorgis, G.; Silberman, N.; Krishnan, D.;
and Erhan, D. 2016. Domain separation networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 343–351.
Brunner, C.; Birbaumer, N.; Blankertz, B.; Guger, C.;
Kübler, A.; Mattia, D.; Millán, J. d. R.; Miralles, F.; Nijholt,
A.; Opisso, E.; et al. 2015. BNCI Horizon 2020: towards a
roadmap for the BCI community. Brain-computer Interfaces
2(1): 1–10.
Duan, R.-N.; Zhu, J.-Y.; and Lu, B.-L. 2013. Differential
entropy feature for EEG-based emotion classification. In
2013 6th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural
Engineering (NER), 81–84. IEEE.
Ganin, Y.; Ustinova, E.; Ajakan, H.; Germain, P.; Larochelle,
H.; Laviolette, F.; Marchand, M.; and Lempitsky, V. 2016.
Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 17(1): 2096–2030.
Ghifary, M.; Balduzzi, D.; Kleijn, W. B.; and Zhang, M.
2016. Scatter component analysis: A unified framework for
domain adaptation and domain generalization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 39(7):
1414–1430.
Kim, B. H.; and Jo, S. 2020. Deep Physiological Affect
Network for the Recognition of Human Emotions. IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing 11(2): 230–243.
Li, H.; Jin, Y.-M.; Zheng, W.-L.; and Lu, B.-L. 2018. Crosssubject emotion recognition using deep adaptation networks.
In International Conference on Neural Information Processing, 403–413. Springer.
Li, J.; Qiu, S.; Shen, Y.-Y.; Liu, C.-L.; and He, H. 2019.
Multisource transfer learning for cross-subject EEG emotion
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics .
Lotte, F.; Congedo, M.; Lécuyer, A.; Lamarche, F.; and Arnaldi, B. 2007. A review of classification algorithms for
EEG-based brain–computer interfaces. Journal of Neural
Engineering 4(2): R1.

Muandet, K.; Balduzzi, D.; and Schölkopf, B. 2013. Domain generalization via invariant feature representation. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 10–18.
Pan, S. J.; and Yang, Q. 2009. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 22(10): 1345–1359.
Samek, W.; Meinecke, F. C.; and Müller, K.-R. 2013. Transferring subspaces between subjects in brain–computer interfacing. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
60(8): 2289–2298.
Sangineto, E.; Zen, G.; Ricci, E.; and Sebe, N. 2014. We
are not all equal: Personalizing models for facial expression
analysis with transductive parameter transfer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 357–366.
Sutskever, I.; Vinyals, O.; and Le, Q. V. 2014. Sequence
to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 3104–3112.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones,
L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; and Polosukhin, I. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 5998–6008.
Vazquez, D.; Lopez, A. M.; Marin, J.; Ponsa, D.; and Geronimo, D. 2013. Virtual and real world adaptation for pedestrian detection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 36(4): 797–809.
Zheng, W.-L.; and Lu, B.-L. 2015. Investigating critical frequency bands and channels for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on
Autonomous Mental Development 7(3): 162–175.
Zheng, W.-L.; and Lu, B.-L. 2016. Personalizing EEG-based
affective models with transfer learning. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2732–2738.
Zheng, W.-L.; Zhu, J.-Y.; and Lu, B.-L. 2019. Identifying
Stable Patterns over Time for Emotion Recognition from
EEG. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 10(3):
417–429.

